[New Post] OAuth 2.0 in Java (#1160)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2022-06-16-oauth-java.adoc

Click the image to zoom in.

image::{% asset_path 'blog/java-oauth2-2022/java-roadmap-preview.jpg' %}[alt=2022 Java Developers Roadmap,link={% asset_path 'blog/java-oauth2-2022/java-roadmap.jpg' %}]

[role="text-right small"]
Image v1 by https://twitter.com/javinpaul[@javinpaul] - https://javarevisited.blogspot.com/2019/10/the-java-developer-roadmap.html[The 2022 Java Developer RoadMap article]
· v2+ https://github.com/devoxx/JavaRoadmap2022[maintained on GitHub] by https://twitter.com/stephan007[@stephan007]

Today, I'll provide you with a state of the OAuth ecosystem in Java. You'll learn which frameworks support OAuth and which ones don't. I'll also offer some practical examples you can run in just a few minutes.

== What the heck is OAuth?

OAuth is an abbreviation for **O**pen **Auth**orization. It's an open standard that anyone can implement. More specifically, OAuth is a standard that apps can use to provide client applications with "secure delegated access." OAuth works over HTTPS and authorizes devices, APIs, servers, and applications with access tokens rather than credentials.

> In the old days (2006), websites used to prompt users for their Gmail credentials, so they could invite their contacts to use the website. Users often provided their credentials, but there was no proof that the website didn't store those credentials for later use. OAuth was developed to users don't have to provide credentials. Instead, they provide an access token from a trusted identity provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the old days (2006), websites used to prompt users for their Gmail credentials, so they could invite their contacts to use the website. Users often provided credentials, but there was no proof that the website didn't store them for later use. OAuth was developed so users don't have to provide credentials. Instead, users provide an access token from a trusted identity provider.
```
typo fix
pruning repetition

---
layout: blog_post
title: "OAuth for Java Developers"
# title: "OAuth 2.0 for Java Developers"
# title: "OAuth 2.0 in Java"
# title: "OAuth 2.1 in Java"
# title: "OAuth 2.0 on the JVM"
author: matt-raible
by: advocate
communities: [java]

> description: ""

Reviewer 2: is it normal to avoid description?

Author: No. Good catch!

tags: [java, oauth2]

> tweets:

Reviewer 2: missing tweets

Author: Fixed tweets.

- ""
- ""
- ""

> image:

Reviewer 2: missing cover image

type: awareness
---
:page-liquid:
:toc: macro
:experimental:

> You can use OAuth to secure apps, APIs, and devices. OAuth has become more and more popular, especially as developers are asked knit together hundreds of apps and thousands of users in enterprise environments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use OAuth to secure apps, APIs, and devices. OAuth has become more and more popular, especially as developers are asked to knit together hundreds of apps and thousands of users in enterprise environments.
```

The Java ecosystem is vast and wide with over 10 million developers around the world and an abundance of IDEs, build tools, libraries, and frameworks to make them more productive. The infographic below is recommended as a starting point for Java developers. It's designed to help guide your learning as you go and add your own software components while your experience grows.

Click on the image to zoom in.

> image::{% asset_path 'blog/java-oauth2-2022/java-roadmap-preview.jpg' %}[alt=2022 Java Developers Roadmap,link={% asset_path 'blog/java-oauth2-2022/java-roadmap.jpg' %}]

Reviewer 2: I personally find this a bit distracting in the post as it takes a focus away a bit, but that could just be me, junior-medior devs might find it useful

[role="text-right small"]
Image v1 by https://twitter.com/javinpaul[@javinpaul] - https://javarevisited.blogspot.com/2019/10/the-java-developer-roadmap.html[The 2022 Java Developer RoadMap article]
· v2+ https://github.com/devoxx/JavaRoadmap2022[maintained on GitHub] by https://twitter.com/stephan007[@stephan007]

> Today, I'd provide you with a state of the OAuth ecosystem in Java. You'll learn which frameworks support OAuth and which ones don't. I'll also provide you with some practical examples you can run in just a few minutes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today, I'll provide you with a state of the OAuth ecosystem in Java. You'll learn which frameworks support OAuth and which ones don't. I'll also provide you with some practical examples you can run in just a few minutes.
```
tense consistency

You know what else was pretty new in the Java world around 2005?

- JSF 1.0
- Spring 1.0
- Flex 1.0
- AJAX term coined in February

Simply put, if you're using SAML for single sign-on (SSO), you're still living in the dark ages of web development. The dawn of a new era happened in 2005 and 2006 with the invention of Ruby on Rails, jQuery, and GWT.

SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol) was a popular implementation for web services, but quickly dropped out of favor for REST (REpresentational State Transfer). Developers everywhere discovered that XML was cumbersome to use compared to JSON.

{% twitter 1379871695163510795 %}

////

== What the heck is OAuth?

OAuth is an abbreviation for **O**pen **Auth**orization. It's an open standard that anyone can implement. More specifically, OAuth is a standard that apps can use to provide client applications with "secure delegated access". OAuth works over HTTPS and authorizes devices, APIs, servers, and applications with access tokens rather than credentials.

> In the old days (2006), websites used to prompt users for their Gmail credentials so they could invite their contacts to use the website. Users would often provide their credentials, but there was not proof that the website didn't store those credentials for later use. OAuth was developed to users don't have to provide credentials. Instead, they provide an access token from a trusted identity provider.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the old days (2006), websites prompted users for their Gmail credentials so they could invite their contacts to use the website. Users would often provide credentials, but there was no proof that the website didn't store those credentials for later use. OAuth was developed so users wouldn't have to provide credentials. Instead, the site provides an access token from a trusted identity provider.
```

"so they could invite their contacts" - still a little ambiguous use of "their" here. Does the website invite the user to invite their contacts, or do they just spam the user's address book.

You can think of OAuth like hotel key cards, but for apps. If you have a hotel key card, you can get access to your room.

> How do you get a hotel key card? You have to do an authentication process at the front desk to get it. After authenticating and obtaining the key card, you can access resources across the hotel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How do you get a hotel key card? You have to do an authentication process at the front desk to get it. After authenticating and obtaining the key card, you can access other resources across the hotel.
```

// todo: is there a better version of this?
image::{% asset_path 'blog/java-oauth2-2022/hotel-key-cards.jpg' %}[alt=OAuth is Hotel key cards for apps,width=720,align=center]

> *OAuth 2.0 is not an authentication protocol.*

Reviewer 2: may be a one liner about Oauth 1 vs Oauth 2 might be useful for the uninitiated

OpenID Connect (aka OIDC) _is_ an authentication protocol. I'll cover that in another post.

> OAuth 2.0 has many flows and https://oauth.net/2.1/[OAuth 2.1] is an in-progress effort to consolidate and simplify the best flows for developers. In a nutshell, OAuth 2.0 requires Proof Key for Code Exchange (PKCE) for authorization code flows and implicit and password credential flows are removed.

Reviewer 2: may be a link to detailed explanation of PKCE could be nice

Author: I'll add a link to https://developer.okta.com/blog/2020/01/23/pkce-oauth2-spring-boot.

If you'd like to play with OAuth 2.0's flows, you can try the https://www.oauth.com/playground/[OAuth 2.0 Playground] (built by https://twitter.com/aaronpk[Aaron Parecki]).

image::{% asset_path 'blog/java-oauth2-2022/oauth2-playground.png' %}[alt=OAuth 2.0 Playground,align=center,link=https://www.oauth.com/playground/]

== Can you do OAuth without a browser?

Developers often wonder, is it possible to do an OAuth flow _without_ a browser in the mix? The short answer is *No*.

https://twitter.com/briandemers/status/1520104453155835905[A browser is required]. The browser doesn't need to be on the same device. There are basically three options if a user is involved:

- Web app: handle a redirect
- CLI, TV, etc: use the Device Grant (browser on another device), app uses REST
- Native app: use a custom URL handler

== Java's OAuth 2.0 support

> Java, the language, does not have native OAuth support. In fact, the JDK doesn't even contain APIs to write a web app. The basic building blocks for constructing web apps is provided by the https://jakarta.ee/specifications/servlet/5.0/[Servlet API and Jakarta EE].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Java, the language, does not have native OAuth support. In fact, the JDK doesn't even contain APIs to write a web app. The basic building blocks for constructing web apps are provided by the https://jakarta.ee/specifications/servlet/5.0/[Servlet API and Jakarta EE].
```

> The Servlet specification has a https://jakarta.ee/specifications/servlet/5.0/jakarta-servlet-spec-5.0.html#security[security section], but there's no OAuth in it. The https://jakarta.ee/specifications/security/3.0/[Jakara Security 3.0] (still under development at the time of this writing) does mention that OpenID Connect and OAuth did _not_ make it into the specification. To me, it seems strange that the "enterprise edition" of Java doesn't have support for delegated authorization or federated identity. Hopefully we work as a community to fix this in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Servlet specification has a https://jakarta.ee/specifications/servlet/5.0/jakarta-servlet-spec-5.0.html#security[security section], but there's no OAuth in it. The https://jakarta.ee/specifications/security/3.0/[Jakara Security 3.0] (still under development at the time of this writing) does mention that OpenID Connect and OAuth did _not_ make it into the specification. To me, it seems strange that the "enterprise edition" of Java doesn't have support for delegated authorization or federated identity. Hopefully we can work as a community to fix this in the future.
```

=== OAuth in Java frameworks

When SAML was first invented in 2005, Java web frameworks were experiencing their peak of popularity. There were _hundreds_ of Java web frameworks and developers would make fun of this embarrassment of riches like they did with JavaScript frameworks in the late 2000s.

image::{% asset_path 'blog/java-oauth2-2022/history-of-web-frameworks-timeline.png' %}[alt=History of web frameworks timeline,link={% asset_path 'blog/java-oauth2-2022/history-of-web-frameworks-timeline.png' %}]

[role="text-right small"]
Image https://github.com/mraible/history-of-web-frameworks-timeline[maintained on GitHub] by https://twitter.com/mraible[@mraible]

Most Java web frameworks supported a form of MVC and others were component-based. All of them rendered their UIs on the server-side.

Fast-forward to 2022 and Java is mostly used for APIs, while JavaScript is often used for UIs.

"I do find it ironic that there are now several JavaScript frameworks that provide developers joy with server-side rendering. It's like the Java MVC frameworks of old, but new to JavaScript. History repeats itself, eh?"
-- Matt Raible

> One of OAuth's key patterns is a *resource server*. A resource server accepts an access token. If it's valid, it gives a client access to the resource owner's data. In this example, a client is an app, the resource owner is a user, and the resource server is the Java API you develop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of OAuth's key patterns is a *resource server*. A resource server accepts an access token. If the token is valid, it gives a client access to the resource owner's data. In this example, a client is an app, the resource owner is a user, and the resource server is the Java API you develop.
```
maybe this is obvious to a Java-savvy reader, to me the 'it' was ambiguous

> === MicroProfile JWT authentication

Reviewer 2: maybe a few lines on why you are comparing these frameworks specifically might be nice. Coz one might wonder that Spring is kind of defacto for building java web apps, but the other frameworks are fancy and new but are they actually used a lot, whats their market share?, should an average java developer care about all of them?

Author: Added this as a paragraph before the "MicroProfile JWT authentication" header.

> In the section below, I'll show you how you can use OAuth and set up a resource server with the most popular Java frameworks. You might think that Spring Boot is the de facto standard, and you should just use it. However, there's a lot of innovation happening elsewhere, and I think it's good to be aware of other options.

When Java EE stagnated in the early 2010s, the Java EE community did too, and eventually created MicroProfile in 2015. MicroProfile is a standards-based effort to group the parts of Java EE that can be used to create a microservice architecture.

As part of MicroProfile, there is a JWT Auth specification. Even though it doesn't mention OAuth, it's very much a viable way to implement an OAuth 2.0 resource server.

If you're using a Java framework that supports MicroProfile, you can likely add the framework's JWT authentication dependency, plus a couple of properties to define the issuer and JWKS (JSON Web Token Key Signatures) location. The key names are standardized and can be used in frameworks like Helidon and Quarkus.

[source,properties]
----
mp.jwt.verify.issuer=https://dev-13337.okta.com/oauth2/default
mp.jwt.verify.publickey.location=https://dev-13337.okta.com/oauth2/default/v1/keys
----

====

> What annoys me about this configuration is `issuer` is an OpenID Connect concept that allows you to find all the endpoints for an identity provider, including the location of the JWKS keys. If you go to `${issuer}/.well-known/openid-configuration`, it has the location of the public keys in the `jwks_uri` value!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What annoys me about this configuration is that `issuer` is an OpenID Connect concept that allows you to find all the endpoints for an identity provider, including the location of the JWKS keys. If you go to `${issuer}/.well-known/openid-configuration`, it has the location of the public keys in the `jwks_uri` value!
```
readability

image::{% asset_path 'blog/java-oauth2-2022/jwks-uri.png' %}[alt=The publickey.location can be calculated!,width=800,align=center]

I really wish MicroProfile made things easier on the developer so you only have to specify the issuer.

The good news is you should be able to refer to one property from another.

[source,properties]
----
mp.jwt.verify.issuer=https://dev-13337.okta.com/oauth2/default
mp.jwt.verify.publickey.location=${mp.jwt.verify.issuer}/v1/keys
----

> *&lt;rant/&gt;*

Reviewer 3: 🤣

====

==== Quarkus

If you want to use MicroProfile JWT authentication with Quarkus, you need to add the properties above and a single dependency.

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-smallrye-jwt</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

==== Helidon

Helidon is very similar to Quarkus. The only difference is its dependency's coordinates.

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.helidon.microprofile.jwt</groupId>
    <artifactId>helidon-microprofile-jwt-auth</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

I've already mentioned Helidon and Quarkus, what about the other popular Java API frameworks?

=== Micronaut

Micronaut has support for OAuth and good documentation on how to configure it with IdPs like https://guides.micronaut.io/latest/micronaut-oauth2-okta.html[Okta], https://guides.micronaut.io/latest/micronaut-oauth2-oidc-google.html[Google], and https://guides.micronaut.io/latest/micronaut-oauth2-github.html[GitHub].

> Micronaut requires a lot more lines of configuration than MicroProfile, but it's mostly YAML's fault. It takes you 11 lines to configure an OAuth 2.0 resource server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Micronaut requires many more lines of configuration than MicroProfile, but it's mostly YAML's fault. It takes you 11 lines to configure an OAuth 2.0 resource server.
```

[source,yaml]
----
micronaut:
  security:
    enabled: true
    token:
      jwt:
        enabled: true
        claims-validators:
          issuer: https://dev-13337.okta.com/oauth2/default
        signatures:
          jwks:
            okta:
              url: https://dev-13337.okta.com/oauth2/default/v1/keys
----

As you can see, Micronaut also requires you to specify the JWKS location, even though it can be looked up from the issuer. `:shakes-fist:`

=== Spring Boot

Spring Boot uses Spring Security by default and it's the only framework that allows you to configure a resource server with one line of code.

[source,properties]
----
spring.security.oauth2.resourceserver.jwt.issuer-uri=https://dev-13337.okta.com/oauth2/default
----

> Of course, you could use YAML instead. That would be a bad life choice. Then it would require six lines of code. Don't be that person. Spring Security is smart enough to look up the JWKS location from the issuer.

Reviewer: I think you're being cheeky here... would it make sense to add a winky emoji for the uninitiated? Just a thought...

Author: Added 😉

To be fair, Spring Security does require some Java code to complete the configuration, while the others do everything automatically.

[source,java]
----
@EnableWebSecurity
public class SecurityConfiguration {

    @Bean
    public SecurityWebFilterChain springSecurityFilterChain(ServerHttpSecurity http) {
        http
            .authorizeRequests(request -> request.anyRequest().authenticated())
            .oauth2ResourceServer(OAuth2ResourceServerConfigurer::jwt);
        return http.build();
    }
}
----

> TIP: If you use the https://github.com/okta/okta-spring-boot[Okta Spring Boot Starter], you do not need to configure things with Java. We've included this configuration for you.

Reviewer 2: where is this included?

Author: It looks like it's in the following file. Do you think I should link to it?

https://github.com/okta/okta-spring-boot/blob/master/oauth2/src/main/java/com/okta/spring/boot/oauth/OktaOAuth2AutoConfig.java

@bdemers Can you confirm this is correct?

Author: I'll add a link to it.

  <div class="video">
    <iframe width="267" height="150" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/3J9uFVd3BoY" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
  </div>
  <div class="video">
    <iframe width="267" height="150" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/w-qKailh3WQ" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
  </div>
  <div class="video">
    <iframe width="267" height="150" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/IG2uo4IP1QI" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
  </div>
  <div class="video">
    <iframe width="267" height="150" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Bj69rOIwQwY" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
  </div>
</div>
++++

At the end of each video, I show how the https://cli.okta.com[Okta CLI] allows you to create working examples for each framework with the `okta start` command.

> If you prefer reading and copy pasta over video, check out these quick tutorials:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you prefer reading and _copy pasta_ over video, check out these quick tutorials:
```
maybe it's just me, I always think this is a typo when I first read it...

Author: I can change it to "following along with a written tutorial over video" if you think it's better.

- link:/blog/2022/05/23/java-rest-api-quarkus[Kickstart a Java REST API with Quarkus]
- link:/blog/2022/05/25/java-rest-api-spring-boot[Start a Java REST API with Spring Boot]
- link:/blog/2022/05/31/java-rest-api-micronaut[Launch a Java REST API with Micronaut]
- link:/blog/2022/06/02/java-rest-api-helidon[Create a Java REST API with Helidon]

== Java web frameworks without OAuth support

> You might get away with saying that JSF and Wicket don't have OAuth support. However, they both build on the Servlet API so it is possible to use them with some of Java's independently-minded security frameworks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You might get away with saying that JSF and Wicket don't have OAuth support. However, they both build on the Servlet API so it is possible to use them with some of Java's independent-minded security frameworks.
```
it's an adjective, so "independent-minded" should do the trick.

It's possible your favorite framework doesn't have a dedicated security plugin for OAuth, but that's not important if you can get _something_ to work, IMHO.

== Java security frameworks

> There are a few Java security frameworks that aren't tied to a specific web framework. I like to call them independently-minded, but honestly, they seem to struggle as volunteer versus funded open source projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a few Java security frameworks that aren't tied to a specific web framework. I like to call them independent-minded, but honestly, they seem to struggle as volunteer-driven versus funded open source projects.
```
clarity

=== Apache Shiro

> Apache Shiro expect to operate in a servlet environment and can work with any framework that's based on servlets and filters. It has many https://shiro.apache.org/integration.html[integrations]&mdash;such as Play, Wicket, and Lift&mdash;but most are dated and unmaintained.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apache Shiro expects to operate in a servlet environment and can work with any framework that's based on servlets and filters. It has many https://shiro.apache.org/integration.html[integrations]&mdash;such as Play, Wicket, and Lift&mdash;but most are dated and unmaintained.
```

Shiro can be adapted to work with OAuth 2.0 as demonstrated by Brian Demers in link:/blog/2020/05/11/java-shiro-oauth[Build a Secure Java Application with Apache Shiro and OAuth 2.0].

=== Pac4j

Pac4j is a security framework with many sub-projects that implement OAuth 2.0, OIDC, and many others, like SAML.

A gentle reminder:

++++
{% twitter 1379871695163510795 %}
++++

When a framework doesn't have OAuth support, I've been able to use Pac4J successfully. For example, with link:/blog/2017/10/31/add-authentication-to-play-framework-with-oidc[Play framework] and link:/blog/2018/09/12/secure-java-ee-rest-api#use-pac4j-to-lock-down-your-java-rest-api[plain ol' Java EE].

> You don't hear much about Pac4J in the Java ecosystem. I'm not certain why that is. I've heard it's quality isn't that great and I also believe it suffers because it's not tied to a popular framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You don't hear much about Pac4J in the Java ecosystem. I'm not certain why that is. I've heard its quality isn't that great and I also believe it suffers because it's not tied to a popular framework.
```
its vs it's

It's kinda like the every-language-needs-a-framework concept. Maybe every security framework needs a web framework to help it succeed?

=== Spring Security

Spring Security has excellent integration with Spring Boot and it depends on the Spring Framework. However, you can use it to secure a link:/blog/2018/09/12/secure-java-ee-rest-api#secure-your-java-rest-api-with-spring-security[Java EE app that uses filters].

It has https://docs.spring.io/spring-security/reference/servlet/oauth2/index.html[OAuth 2.0], https://docs.spring.io/spring-security/reference/servlet/oauth2/login/index.html[OpenID Connect], and even https://docs.spring.io/spring-security/reference/servlet/saml2/index.html[SAML] support.

====
It's a shame Spring Security has to support SAML. 😞

> Apparently, there's a demand for it from their customers and users. Or maybe it's just mis-informed decision makers? Are developers still implementing SOAP APIs? I hope not! If not, why are developers still using SAML?!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apparently, there's a demand for SAML from Spring Security customers and users. Or maybe it's just misinformed decision makers? Are developers still implementing SOAP APIs? I hope not! If not, why are developers still using SAML?!
```
I think you should be extra unambiguous here

Author: Do you mean I should change things more than your suggestions?

OIDC does it better, just use it!
====

> == Auth 2.0 authorization servers

Reviewer 4: this should be "OAuth 2.0" right?

> == Auth 2.0 authorization servers

Author: ```suggestion
== OAuth 2.0 authorization servers
```

Up to this point, all the things I've talked about are OAuth clients. They require an identity provider to do OAuth flows. An identity provider has OAuth 2.0 authorization servers. Most of the big providers have their own proprietary implementation.

However, there are a couple of open source Java-based authorization servers you can use:

- https://www.keycloak.org/[Keycloak]
- https://spring.io/projects/spring-authorization-server[Spring Authorization Server]
- https://github.com/wso2/product-is[WSO2 Identity Server]

> Since I work for a company that is an OAuth 2.0 identity provider, it's my duty to inform you that using one of these is called "building your own." We recommend buying instead. From us, of course. 😉

Reviewer 2: :P nice one

In reality, if you're a developer, you're always going to _build your own_ somewhat. Even if you use a library like Spring Security, you can't just add it to your project and expect everything to work without writing any code. Granted, it might only require 10 lines of code, but you're still building _something_.

You can't just buy Okta and secure a Java API with it without writing code.

== What about JavaFX?

JavaFX is often touted as an excellent way to build desktop apps. The folks that recommend it are typically Java FX experts and Java enthusiasts that hate JavaScript.

> JavaFX's OAuth support is virtually non-existent and there doesn't seem to be many folks interested in fixing that.

Reviewer 2: who uses JavaFX except the ones singing its praises on Twitter :P

> JavaFX's OAuth support is virtually non-existent and there doesn't seem to be many folks interested in fixing that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JavaFX's OAuth support is virtually non-existent and there don't seem to be many folks interested in fixing that.
```
grammar

As one of the few Java Champions that likes JavaScript, I poked the bear a couple of weeks ago.

++++
{% twitter 1520048029641986048 %}
++++

My guess is this won't be solved anytime soon. I'd love to be wrong.

// == What about Kotlin and Scala?
// I like this ^^ title, but it seems to clash with the previous title for JavaFX
== Do Scala and Kotlin support OAuth?

Scala was all the rage in the mid-2010s. When the Play framework team announced they were writing Play 2 in Scala, the JVM world rejoiced. I was interested in it too. I took a course from Martin Odersky, learned a ton, and reached the top of Hacker News when I https://raibledesigns.com/rd/entry/play_2_0_a_web[live-blogged about it] at Devoxx Belgium in 2011.

> Since then, the popularity of Play has wained, Spring Boot has taken over, and Kotlin is a JVM language that lots of developers admire.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since then, the popularity of Play has waned, Spring Boot has taken over, and Kotlin is a JVM language that lots of developers admire.
```
